Add model development checklists to documentation (#5555)
nautobot/nautobot: nautobot/docs/development/core/model-checklist.md

# Model Development Checklist

A general best-practices checklist to follow when adding a net-new data model in Nautobot or adding new fields to an existing model.

> ## Bootstrapping a new Model

Reviewer: I think it would be helpful to further divide this into sections that could be used when breaking up a "new model" issue into smaller chunks. Perhaps:

- ### Database Model
- ### Filtering
- ### API Views
- ### UI Views

> - ▢ Implement model in `nautobot.<app>.models` module

Reviewer: Why the `▢` characters? To make it look like a checklist?

Author: That was the goal, yes. I'd initially done `[ ]` to match the GitHub format but it doesn't look great in the rendered docs.

Author: Another option *might* be some custom CSS to set the list bullet style to use `▢`?

Reviewer: That might be nice to get rid of the bullets and only have the boxes

    - ▢ Use appropriate base class (`PrimaryModel` or `BaseModel`) and mixin(s)
    - ▢ Use appropriate `@extras_features` decorator values
    - ▢ Define appropriate uniqueness constraint(s)
    - ▢ Define appropriate `__str__()` logic
    - ▢ _optional_ Define appropriate additional `clean()` logic
        - ▢ Be sure to always call `super().clean()` as well!

>     - ▢ _optional_ Define appropriate `verbose_name`/`verbose_name_plural` if defaults aren't optimal

Reviewer: Should these be under `Implement model in nautobot.<app>.models module`?

Reviewer: It's too early. I was thinking this was talking about `nautobot.apps`

- ▢ Generate database schema migration(s) with `invoke makemigrations <app> -n <migration_name>`
- ▢ Implement API `<Model>Serializer` class in `nautobot.<app>.api.serializers` module

>     - ▢ Use appropriate base class and mixin(s)

Reviewer: Perhaps here, and above when referencing base classes link to `best-practices.md#base-classes`?

- ▢ Implement `<Model>FilterSet` class in `nautobot.<app>.filters` module

>     - ▢ Use appropriate base class (`NautobotFilterSet` or `BaseFilterSet`) and mixin(s)

Reviewer: `best-practices.md` says this:

> FilterSets must inherit from nautobot.extras.filters.NautobotFilterSet (which inherits from nautobot.core.filters.BaseFilterSet)

Author: Updating that document - there are cases for `BaseFilterSet` for certain models.

- ▢ Implement API `<Model>ViewSet` class in `nautobot.<app>.api.views` module
    - ▢ Use appropriate base class and mixin(s)
    - ▢ Use appropriate `select_related`/`prefetch_related` for performance
- ▢ Add API viewset to `nautobot.<app>.api.urls` module
- ▢ Implement UI `<Model>Table` class in `nautobot.<app>.tables` module
    - ▢ Use appropriate base class and mixin(s)
    - ▢ In the vast majority of cases, a table's `Meta.fields` should have `"pk"` as the first entry and (if present as a column) `"actions"` as the last entry, so that these two columns appear correctly at the far left and far right of the table.
- ▢ Implement `<Model>Form` class in `nautobot.<app>.forms` module
    - ▢ Use appropriate base class and mixin(s)
- ▢ Implement `<Model>FilterForm` class in `nautobot.<app>.forms` module
    - ▢ Use appropriate base class and mixin(s)
- ▢ Implement `<Model>BulkEditForm` class in `nautobot.<app>.forms` module
    - ▢ Use appropriate base class and mixin(s)

> - ▢ Implement `nautobot/<app>/templates/<app>/<model>.html` detail template

Author: It's not "really" optional at present, the default template is pretty much useless right now. You have to implement this to get any real value from it.

- ▢ Select appropriate `on_delete` behavior (`SET_NULL`, `CASCADE`, `PROTECT`)
- ▢ Add a `DynamicModelChoiceField` to `<ModelA>Form`
- ▢ Add a `NaturalKeyOrPKMultipleChoiceFilter` to `<ModelA>FilterSet`
- ▢ Add a `DynamicModelMultipleChoiceField(required=False, ...)` to `<ModelA>FilterForm`
- ▢ Add a `DynamicModelChoiceField(required=False, ...)` to `<ModelA>BulkEditForm`
- ▢ Add `select_related` to API `<ModelA>ViewSet.queryset`
- ▢ Add `select_related` to UI `<ModelA>UIViewSet.queryset`
- ▢ _optional_ Add `annotate(<model_a>_count=count_related(ModelA,...)` to `<ModelB>ViewSet.queryset`
    - ▢ Add `<model_a>_count` field to `<ModelB>Serializer`
- ▢ _optional_ Add `<model_a>_count = LinkedCountColumn(...)` to `<ModelB>Table` and `<ModelB>Table.fields`
- ▢ _optional_ Add related object table to ModelB detail view

#### Adding a Status or Role field to a Model

- ▢ Use `StatusField` or `RoleField` in place of a generic `ForeignKey`
- ▢ Add [data migration](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/topics/migrations/) providing default Status/Role records for this model
    - ▢ Remember: data migrations must not share a file with schema migrations or vice versa!

>     - ▢ Specify appropriate migration dependencies (for example, against another app that you're using models from)

Reviewer 2: We also should probably mention that we need to update the `role_retrieve.html` while adding a role field to a model. Since we have a test in place to check whether the related table is rendered in that template. `nautobot.extras.tests.test_views.RoleTestCase.test_view_with_content_types`

Author: Does this fall within the general guidance at line 113 above (`_optional_ Add related object table to ModelB detail view`), or is this something we need to call out separately?

Reviewer 2: I think it is really not `optional` since we have a test in place to check the presence of related object tables. I would say it is mandatory for role-related Models at least so it might be worth calling out separately IMHO.

Author: Fair, will add.

# Model Development Checklist

A general best-practices checklist to follow when adding a new data model in Nautobot or adding new fields to an existing model.

<!-- markdownlint-disable no-inline-html -->
<style>
article ul li:before {
    content: '□';
    margin:0 5px 0 -15px;
}
article ul li {
    list-style-type: none;
}
</style>
<!-- markdownlint-enable no-inline-html -->

## Bootstrapping a new Model

### Data Model

- Implement model in `nautobot.<app>.models` module
    - Use appropriate [base class](best-practices.md#base-classes) and mixin(s)

>     - Use appropriate `@extras_features` decorator values

Reviewer: We don't have any good docs on the `extras_features` do we?

    - Define appropriate uniqueness constraint(s)
    - Define appropriate `__str__()` logic
    - _optional_ Define appropriate additional [`clean()`](best-practices.md#model-validation) logic
        - Be sure to always call `super().clean()` as well!
    - _optional_ Define appropriate `verbose_name`/`verbose_name_plural` if defaults aren't optimal
- Generate database schema migration(s) with `invoke makemigrations <app> -n <migration_name>`

> - _optional_ Add [data migration(s)](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/topics/migrations/) to populate default records, migrate data from existing models, etc.

Reviewer: Should this link to the [data migrations](https://docs.djangoproject.com/en/stable/topics/migrations/#data-migrations) section?

    - Remember: data migrations must not share a file with schema migrations or vice versa!

>     - Specify appropriate migration dependencies (for example, against another app that you're using models from)

Reviewer: Can we add some context for this common mistake?

> Any model retrieved in a data migration with `apps.get_model("app_label.model_name")` should have a dependency that ensures the model is in the desired state before your migration runs. This may only require a dependency on the migration where that model was created or, if a specific field is required on the referenced model, the migration where that field was introduced.

> - _optional_ Enhance `ConfigContext` to be assignable by new Device-related model

Reviewer: Maybe

```suggestion
- _optional_ Enhance `ConfigContext` if the new model can be used as a filter critieria for assigning Devices or Virtual Machines to Config Contexts
```

> - _optional_ Enhance `ConfigContext` to be assignable by new Device-related model

Author: ```suggestion
- _optional_ Enhance `ConfigContext` if the new model can be used as a filter criteria for assigning Devices or Virtual Machines to Config Contexts
```

- Implement API `<Model>ViewSet` class in `nautobot.<app>.api.views` module
    - Use appropriate [base class](best-practices.md#base-classes) and mixin(s)
    - Use appropriate `select_related`/`prefetch_related` for performance
- Add API viewset to `nautobot.<app>.api.urls` module

### UI

- Implement UI `<Model>Table` class in `nautobot.<app>.tables` module
    - Use appropriate [base class](best-practices.md#base-classes) and mixin(s)
    - In the vast majority of cases, a table's `Meta.fields` should have `"pk"` as the first entry and (if present as a column) `"actions"` as the last entry, so that these two columns appear correctly at the far left and far right of the table.
- Implement `<Model>Form` class in `nautobot.<app>.forms` module
    - Use appropriate [base class](best-practices.md#base-classes) and mixin(s)
- Implement `<Model>FilterForm` class in `nautobot.<app>.forms` module
    - Use appropriate [base class](best-practices.md#base-classes) and mixin(s)
- Implement `<Model>BulkEditForm` class in `nautobot.<app>.forms` module
    - Use appropriate [base class](best-practices.md#base-classes) and mixin(s)

> - Implement `nautobot/<app>/templates/<app>/<model>.html` detail template

Reviewer: Shouldn't this be

```suggestion
- Implement `nautobot/<app>/templates/<app>/<model>_retrieve.html` detail template
```
